Another way that people get at,
this is natural experiments.
So a great example of natural
experiments is where smoking trials.
So you can't randomize people some
to smoke, and some not to smoke, so
you can't get the kind of Cadillac version
of a causal fact via randomization.
What you can look at is, for example,
places that put in smoking bans.
And smoking bans impact smoking behavior.
Right?
So, you can maybe accurate numbers of
smoking related cardiac
issues in a city or
some other geographic unit, and before and
after a smoking ban went into effect.
Okay?
And that gets at the idea of causality for
the same reasons we were
talking about before.
But of course, it fails with
some fundamental assumptions.
You have to aggregate it a high level.
You don't get individuals.
You certainly don't get
individual counter factuals.
And everything that's aliased with the
timing of before the law to after the law
could contaminate our results.
So if in the same election cycle where
the smoking ban was passed that broadly
impacted people's smoking behaviors.
If that same election cycle had other
policies that also impacted things,
those other policies would also be
associated with whatever cardiac decline,
decline in cardiac issues that you
saw from your hospital records.
So again, naturalized natural experiments,
something where some external manipulation
like a ban going into effect,
those are another way you can try to get
that causality, again, but
with a lot of assumptions.
And again, the entire field of causal
infringement is trying to outline those
assumptions and again, in this case, the
assumptions, I think, are quite strong.
Matching is another great one and, so
matching is this idea of
finding Dopplegangers.
So here I have a picture of
President Obama, and then I looked up
Doppelganger for President Obama on
Google, and it found this fellow.
So what's the idea of matching?
So if I have a collection of subjects
that received the treatment,
I find people who
are very close in every other respect
control subjects and match them up.
So as an example, this is very
commonly done in medical studies.
So if you found, for
example you could look retrospectively,
if you found a bunch of cases of
people that died of lung cancer.
And you had a complete medical history and
a lot of other history on these subjects,
then you would find some other people
to match and contrast them with that
never had lung cancer, but
that had the same weight, same age, etc.
etc.
So at any rate,
think when you think about matching,
think about why when people do this,
why they're thinking causally.
They're trying to get that counter
factual idea by saying okay,
I can't observe this person twice
in two states of nature, but
me, I can observe this person and
they're close Doppelganger.
Of course, the real problem with matching,
well there's a couple,
but the main problem with matching is
you're only as good as those
things that you can match on.
Right?
And then there's also the problem of
finding matches.
You may not be able to find the data set
to match enough characteristics, but
you're only as good as
those things you match on.
Everything you fail to match on,
than you haven't found a real,
you haven't found the same person
in the important respects.
There's other problems.
Often, if you have a data set, and
you can find matches for some people and
you throw out the remainder because
you can't find good matches for them,
well then you've kind of destroyed some
of the generalizability of your sample.
If you have a really good sample, and
then now you're only analyzing
the people that have matches,
that new sample may not be generalizable
in the way the original sample was.
So again, in all cases when you're
trying to make causal assumptions,
you're going to have to bite some bullets.
But I would hope that you can see
the connection of how people are trying to
think causally and think about
counterfactuals when they do matching.
Randomization is our best tool.
And it's our most effective tool for
estimating average causal effect.
So we have an entire class and
lecture on randomization in AB testing.
But the idea of randomization
is to make the treated and
untreated groups as directly
comparable as possible.
So if you have a group of people and
you randomize the twist and
tone to half of them, and the other half
of them don't get anything, well yes,
you don't have exact matches of people who
receive the controls to people who didn't.
But in all other respects by
virtue of the randomization,
they should with high probability,
the groups should be directly comparable.
And you can show via some mathematics
that if the sample is large enough and
it's a random sample, you do really
get two average causal effects.
This doesn't mean that randomization
is a panacea, there can be issues.
For example, there might be dropout,
people get randomized to
the twisting zone, but
they realize they look kinda ridiculous
doing it, so they stop doing it.
So the collection of people that
complete the treatment are different
than the people that were randomized
to the treatment, so there's
lots of issues that can come up, even in
our Cadillac version of randomized trials.
But this is to date the best way that
we can get that causal and effect.
So what are some other
examples of things we can do?
Instrumental variables are a very clever
idea, and we're not gonna go through
the details, but imagine if you
wanted to understand whether or
not oral contraceptives had
a relationship with ovarian cancer.
Very reasonable question.
So, and let's suppose you
you looked at something like reimbursement
rates as those relate to ovarian cancer.
Well the fact that there's no direct
link between reimbursement rates and
ovarian cancer.
You know, how we elect to
reimburse oral contraceptive
usage through insurance plans.
Can't possibly have any real relationship
with ovarian cancer, so any effect of
reimbursement rates on ovarian cancer
has to go through contraceptive use.
So people have used this idea.
The reimbursement rate is an instrumental
variable so people have used this idea to
try and come causal effects without
actually having randomization.
There's a big assumption in instrumental
variables that the only way in which
reimbursement rates could get to ovarian
cancer is through oral contraceptive use.
Again, that assumption is often that
the only link between the instrumental
variable and the outcome is through
this variable that you're interested in.
That assumption is often suspect as it's
very hard to find instrumental variables.
But this was an incredibly clever idea
it underlies a lot of causal thinking,
modern causal thinking, and
it's a pretty interesting approach.
And then there's always modeling.
So in modeling you're trying to,
for example,
build up a model that explains why
people respond to the treatment or not.
And if that is model
sort of all encompassing,
then you don't need to see
the person in two states of nature.
You have in a sense the two states of
nature because you've built up the system,
you've understood the system
through the model.
Again, this is only as good as the model
is, it's fraught with assumptions.
And so, and I would just say
the most well known modeling
technique in causal inferences
uses so-called propensity scores.
So what I've given you in this lecture
is one definition of causality,
this counter factual
definition of causality.
One generalization of the idea,
the average causal effect.
And how different ways of statistical
thinking try to get at this.
And we try to understand both that
these ways of statistical thinking
get at causal effects, but they come
with a lot of assumption and baggage.
And that there's often no perfect
way to get at causal effects.
And the best thing we have
going is randomization.
So if you'd like to read
more about causality,
actually the Wikipedia page on
causal inferences is pretty good.
And I think any of the survey papers by,
for example, Donald Rubin,
are wonderful reads on causal inferences.
He's one of the modern forefathers.
Of the renewed interest in
causal thinking and statistics.
Well thanks for listening, I look forward
to seeing you in the next lecture.